_08-cadences-phrasing/b1-ex-phrasesubmotive.md, before:

---
layout: chapter
title: Lesson 8b - The Phrase, Sub-phrase, and Motive
abc: true
---

<!-- You need to add some explanations for non-chord tones before they begin the analysis -->

When we perform a harmonic analysis, we are attempting to explain how a listener hears a harmonic progression by determining which pitches are functional and non-functional to a majority of listeners. To do so, we rely on our understanding of diatonic tendencies and voice-leading to explain likely interpretations of a listener, in the same way that an experienced teacher relies on their past successes with students to better determine the likely efficacy of a particular teaching strategy.

Once we go beyond looking at the building blocks of Western music--rhythm, intervals, chords, keys, etc.--and begin combining these concepts to analyze function, we begin to organize music into structures that combine these individual ideas into complete musical statements. 

A *motive* (or *motif*) is the smallest identifiable fragment of music. It can be a short melodic fragment, a short harmonic progression, a distinct rhythm, or a combination of these things. A composer can take a motive and build an entire work around it through various transformations, but it will always retain some fundamental relationships of pitch, rhythm, or both.

A *phrase* is the complete musical idea built to support a motive. The most common analogy used to describe a phrase is to compare it to a "musical sentence". A good written or verbal sentence has a clear beginning, middle, and end. It has a few required structures and often some decorative parts to provide more specific function. This is exactly how a musical phrase works. It has a clear beginning, middle, and end; it has required structures to define its function; and it can be manipulated, decorated, and transformed to relate to the ideas that surround it. Phrases can sometimes be divided into *sub-phrases*, but these sub-phrases do not function independently; instead, sub-phrases are best thought of as motives with their supporting textures.

## Identifying phrases

Now that we have a basic understanding of harmonic progressions, harmonic function, labeling function with Roman numerals, and cadences, we can combine these ideas to explore musical phrases. 
- After listening to Mozart's *An Die Freude* multiple times (found below), mark the beginning and ending of each phrase based on your listening. 
    - Remember that each phrase should sound like a complete musical idea with a clear beginning, middle, and end.
- Once you have established these, label the last two chords of each phrase using Roman numerals and inversion figures.
- Do each of your phrase endings fit one of the cadences discussed in Unit 7c? If so, label the cadence below the Roman numerals.
- Identify at least one motive and describe what are defining characteristics of the motive. Rhythm? Specific intervals? Repeated progressions?
- Find multiple iterations of your motive. How does Mozart transform it throughout the piece?
- Once you have completed each of these steps, discuss what you think defines a phrase. What are the essential components?

Because this piece only has two voices, many chords will have more than one option for a harmony, so you must use the harmonic flowchart from Unit 7a to choose the most likely harmony based on function. For example, if a harmony only has `mi` and `sol`, this could be either a I chord or a iii chord. If you put it into context, however, it will become clear what harmony the listener is likely to hear. If the harmony with `mi` and `sol` is preceded by `fa` and `sol`, it is highly *unlikely* that this is a iii chord, because `fa` and `sol` outline a V<sup>7</sup> harmony and a V chord will not resolve to a iii chord. Instead the listener will hear this as a V chord resolving to a I chord--albeit an unstable I chord.

**NOTE: This piece has multiple modulations that I have marked into the score. We will cover modulations in a later unit, but for now, make sure to analyze each phrase ending in the correct key. If you do not, your cadences will not make sense.**

{% capture ex1 %}X:1
T:Mozart - An Die Freude
M:2/4
L:1/8
Q:1/4=70
K:F
V:1
F2- FG/2A/2| G4| AG/2A/2 BG| EF z2| F2- FA/2c/2| cB- BG/2F/2|
E2- EG/2B/2| A2 z2| c2- cA/2F/2| d2 c2| cB BA| AG z2| G2- Gc|
A2- Af/2d/2| c2- c=B| c2 z2| c2- ce/2c/2| Af ed| c2 =B2| c2 z2|
A2- A_B/2c/2| cB AG| _e2 dc| B/2A/2G z2| c2- cd/2=e/2| fe dc|
BA GF| c2 z2| c2- cd/2B/2| Af (3efd| c2- cd/2B/2| BA z2| c2- cA/2F/2|
d2- dc/2B/2| Ac EG| F2 z2| c2- cB/2A/2| d/2f/2e/2g/2 fB| A2 G2| F2 z2|]
V:2 clef=bass
zA, G,F,| zE, D,C,| F,F, D,B,,| C,D, z2| zA, A,A,| zG, G,G,|
w:F:
C,C, C,C,| F,F, G,G,| A,A, A,A,| B,B,, A,,A,| G,E, F,=B,,| C,C, D,D,| E,E, E,E,|
w:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ C:
F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,G,| A,A, G,F,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,,G,,| C,C/2D/2 C/2B,/2A,/2G,/2|
^F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,G,| ^F,F, F,F,| G,G, =F,F,| E,E, B,B,| A,C B,A,|
w:g: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ F:
B,A, G,F,| C,C, C,C,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| A,A, A,A,|
B,B, B,B,| CC C,C,| D,D, D,D,| A,,A,, A,,A,,| B,,B, A,B,| CC C,C,| F,2 z2|]

{% endcapture %}
{% include abc-example.html number="1" abc=ex1 %}

## Conclusions

A phrase is a complete musical idea that:
- has a clear sense of harmonic progression.
- ends with a cadence.
- has a melodic structure that creates tension and release.
- most often ends with longer rhythmic values to create a sense of pause or rest.

### Phrase Key to *An Die Freude*

Phrases 
1. m. 1-4 Deceptive cadence (DC)
2. m. 5-8 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
3. m. 9-12 Half Cadence (HC)
4. m. 13-16 Deceptive Cadence (DC)
5. m. 17-20 Perfect Authentic Cadence (PAC)
6. m. 21-24 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
7. m. 25-28 Half Cadence (HC)
8. m. 29-32 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
9. m. 33-36 Deceptive Cadence (DC)
10. m. 37-40 Perfect Authentic Cadence (PAC)

In this piece, each phrase is four measures long, and most musical pieces will establish a "standard" phrase length. This is not a defining feature of phrases, though, because many composers prefer to have varied phrase lengths in their compositions to keep the listener engaged.

Commit message:

added point about contour in phrasing

_08-cadences-phrasing/b1-ex-phrasesubmotive.md, after:

---
layout: chapter
title: Lesson 8b - The Phrase, Sub-phrase, and Motive
abc: true
---

<!-- You need to add some explanations for non-chord tones before they begin the analysis -->

When we perform a harmonic analysis, we are attempting to explain how a listener hears a harmonic progression by determining which pitches are functional and non-functional to a majority of listeners. To do so, we rely on our understanding of diatonic tendencies and voice-leading to explain likely interpretations of a listener, in the same way that an experienced teacher relies on their past successes with students to better determine the likely efficacy of a particular teaching strategy.

Once we go beyond looking at the building blocks of Western music--rhythm, intervals, chords, keys, etc.--and begin combining these concepts to analyze function, we begin to organize music into structures that combine these individual ideas into complete musical statements. 

A *motive* (or *motif*) is the smallest identifiable fragment of music. It can be a short melodic fragment, a short harmonic progression, a distinct rhythm, or a combination of these things. A composer can take a motive and build an entire work around it through various transformations, but it will always retain some fundamental relationships of pitch, rhythm, or both.

A *phrase* is the complete musical idea built to support a motive. The most common analogy used to describe a phrase is to compare it to a "musical sentence". A good written or verbal sentence has a clear beginning, middle, and end. It has a few required structures and often some decorative parts to provide more specific function. This is exactly how a musical phrase works. It has a clear beginning, middle, and end; it has required structures to define its function; and it can be manipulated, decorated, and transformed to relate to the ideas that surround it. Phrases can sometimes be divided into *sub-phrases*, but these sub-phrases do not function independently; instead, sub-phrases are best thought of as motives with their supporting textures.

## Identifying phrases

Now that we have a basic understanding of harmonic progressions, harmonic function, labeling function with Roman numerals, and cadences, we can combine these ideas to explore musical phrases. 
- After listening to Mozart's *An Die Freude* multiple times (found below), mark the beginning and ending of each phrase based on your listening. 
    - Remember that each phrase should sound like a complete musical idea with a clear beginning, middle, and end.
- Once you have established these, label the last two chords of each phrase using Roman numerals and inversion figures.
- Do each of your phrase endings fit one of the cadences discussed in Unit 7c? If so, label the cadence below the Roman numerals.
- Identify at least one motive and describe what are defining characteristics of the motive. Rhythm? Specific intervals? Repeated progressions?
- Find multiple iterations of your motive. How does Mozart transform it throughout the piece?
- Once you have completed each of these steps, discuss what you think defines a phrase. What are the essential components?

Because this piece only has two voices, many chords will have more than one option for a harmony, so you must use the harmonic flowchart from Unit 7a to choose the most likely harmony based on function. For example, if a harmony only has `mi` and `sol`, this could be either a I chord or a iii chord. If you put it into context, however, it will become clear what harmony the listener is likely to hear. If the harmony with `mi` and `sol` is preceded by `fa` and `sol`, it is highly *unlikely* that this is a iii chord, because `fa` and `sol` outline a V<sup>7</sup> harmony and a V chord will not resolve to a iii chord. Instead the listener will hear this as a V chord resolving to a I chord--albeit an unstable I chord.

**NOTE: This piece has multiple modulations that I have marked into the score. We will cover modulations in a later unit, but for now, make sure to analyze each phrase ending in the correct key. If you do not, your cadences will not make sense.**

{% capture ex1 %}X:1
T:Mozart - An Die Freude
M:2/4
L:1/8
Q:1/4=70
K:F
V:1
F2- FG/2A/2| G4| AG/2A/2 BG| EF z2| F2- FA/2c/2| cB- BG/2F/2|
E2- EG/2B/2| A2 z2| c2- cA/2F/2| d2 c2| cB BA| AG z2| G2- Gc|
A2- Af/2d/2| c2- c=B| c2 z2| c2- ce/2c/2| Af ed| c2 =B2| c2 z2|
A2- A_B/2c/2| cB AG| _e2 dc| B/2A/2G z2| c2- cd/2=e/2| fe dc|
BA GF| c2 z2| c2- cd/2B/2| Af (3efd| c2- cd/2B/2| BA z2| c2- cA/2F/2|
d2- dc/2B/2| Ac EG| F2 z2| c2- cB/2A/2| d/2f/2e/2g/2 fB| A2 G2| F2 z2|]
V:2 clef=bass
zA, G,F,| zE, D,C,| F,F, D,B,,| C,D, z2| zA, A,A,| zG, G,G,|
w:F:
C,C, C,C,| F,F, G,G,| A,A, A,A,| B,B,, A,,A,| G,E, F,=B,,| C,C, D,D,| E,E, E,E,|
w:_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ C:
F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,G,| A,A, G,F,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,,G,,| C,C/2D/2 C/2B,/2A,/2G,/2|
^F,F, F,F,| G,G, G,G,| ^F,F, F,F,| G,G, =F,F,| E,E, B,B,| A,C B,A,|
w:g: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ F:
B,A, G,F,| C,C, C,C,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| E,E, E,E,| F,F, F,F,| A,A, A,A,|
B,B, B,B,| CC C,C,| D,D, D,D,| A,,A,, A,,A,,| B,,B, A,B,| CC C,C,| F,2 z2|]

{% endcapture %}
{% include abc-example.html number="1" abc=ex1 %}

## Conclusions

A phrase is a complete musical idea that:
- has a clear sense of harmonic progression.
- ends with a cadence.
- has a melodic structure that creates tension and release.
- has a contour with a clear climax (high or low point).
- most often ends with longer rhythmic values to create a sense of pause or rest.

### Phrase Key to *An Die Freude*

Phrases 
1. m. 1-4 Deceptive cadence (DC)
2. m. 5-8 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
3. m. 9-12 Half Cadence (HC)
4. m. 13-16 Deceptive Cadence (DC)
5. m. 17-20 Perfect Authentic Cadence (PAC)
6. m. 21-24 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
7. m. 25-28 Half Cadence (HC)
8. m. 29-32 Imperfect Authentic Cadence (IAC)
9. m. 33-36 Deceptive Cadence (DC)
10. m. 37-40 Perfect Authentic Cadence (PAC)

In this piece, each phrase is four measures long, and most musical pieces will establish a "standard" phrase length. This is not a defining feature of phrases, though, because many composers prefer to have varied phrase lengths in their compositions to keep the listener engaged.
